in 2021 a television production team building a set at trinity wharf, london discovered a hidden staircase leading to a cavernous suite of rooms deep beneath faraday’s lighthouse. it was filled with abandoned desks and empty filing cabinets, but in one of the drawers they found a mysterious folder, clearly very old, filled with charts, documents, maps and figures. much of the text was encrypted, and each document was stamped with an image of the lighthouse. unable to decipher the contents but sensing a scoop and the possibility of a brand new series the producer sent the folder to the v&a for restoration and advice. the curator, an alumnus of the national cipher challenge, managed to break one of the ciphers and was so intrigued by what she read that she sent it to her friend jodie, who was now working with gchq. what she discovered has shaken the british and american security establishment to its core. unsure who to trust they need your help to crack the codes and to track down and defeat the lighthouse conspiracy. harry, i am bored, and i am really not sure why i have been exiled to the archaeologists. did i do something to upset someone? i am really, really hoping that our overlords will find something a bit more relevant for me to tackle soon.
the group here is great, but it feels like there is a diminishing return on breaking wwii ciphers seventy-six years on, and even the cold war fialka intercept pile doesn't seem to be giving much back. if you don't have anything for me to work on, then maybe you could send over some newbies for me to train up? we received a stack of material from london a couple of weeks ago that might make a good exercise for them, and while the first few texts are relatively simple, it would be a good exercise for young analysts to try to work out what they are telling us.
i have attached the first item from the batch so you can see what i mean. i would very dearly like to know what "the great matter" refers to, and i suspect you will want to know too.
the recruits don't need to know much to break this one; if they have done our induction training on basic ciphers, they should be fine. my colleagues here have nicknamed this file the lighthouse conspiracy, because of where the papers were found. that makes it sound a lot more impressive than it first looks, but you never know where something like this might lead. i have set up a secure online system so the trainees can get access to case files and send me their attempts at deciphering. if you point them there, then i will check how they are getting on. maybe they could look at the boss codebreaking guide as well if they need to brush up their skills.
all the best, jodie my dear m, thank you for letting me know about t's offer to join with us in the great matter. while i still have many ideas for how to prosecute our plan, my days are growing short, as are yours, and we will need to find others of a similar mind who have the wit and imagination to carry it forward. our ability to influence matters directly will continue to depend on the power of the devices we can fashion, and it will be clear to you that this will require new ways of thinking about the world as well as new technologies to manipulate it. t, together with l and the young e will, i hope, bring a new perspective, and help to keep our little conspiracy alive for another generation.
our adventures so far have, of necessity, been limited in scope, though our acquisition of babbage's plans and the suppression of his analytic engine must count as a highlight. if we are to succeed on the grand scale that we both think is necessary, then it is time for us to formalise our arrangements and to establish a headquarters for our operations.
i have given this some thought and have an idea that i hope will please you. we should build a lighthouse in london! i can immediately see your objection. london has no rocky shores, and so no need of one, but your experiments with lanterns give us the ideal excuse to build one as a place to test them.
the opportunities this will afford are many: the delivery of large crates of equipment will go unnoticed, considered as part of the natural business of the place; its location on a busy wharf would disguise the necessary comings and goings of our co-conspirators; the waterway will provide us with ready transportation both inland via the canals and to the docks at tilbury for our international ventures. not least, the extraordinary power needed for our devices will be mistaken for the energy required to run your public experiments.
i have little expertise in the design or engineering of such structures, but i imagine that they require substantial footings. the development of these will provide the cover we need to construct our secret headquarters under the more public face of the lighthouse itself and its ancillary buildings.
it may be that i have missed something important in my considerations, in which case please do point that out, but if we are to pass on our discoveries, ambitions and plans to the next generation we will need to give them a more permanent home, so i hope we can agree together on the best way to proceed.
yours, ch jodie, you were not placed with the archaeologists as a punishment; everyone takes their turn on that shift because we never know what might turn up in old documents. when i ran the group, we found evidence of a russian agent placed in the sdece in the aftermath of the war who was acting as liaison with british and us intelligence. she had remained undiscovered for thirty-five years and leaked a whole load of information across the iron curtain. the team cracked a fialka cipher from 1956, and that led to an arrest and confession. i admit that the case you are working on doesn’t seem likely to have the same impact, but you never know where it might lead. i took a look at the papers you sent, and i thought this one looked very interesting. the information it contains ties down the year it was written pretty conclusively, and i have to say i don’t like the sound of the phrase profit from the schleswig conflict. i think it is clear who m must be, but i am still unsure about the others mentioned in these letters. i am also very unclear why m might have been involved in what looks like a conspiracy aimed at wartime profiteering. i checked, and there is nothing on file from the period to suggest that this was suspected. indeed there was nothing on file at all, which, thinking about it is slightly strange. m was a public figure and of definite interest, so there should be something. if you have time it might be worth logging in to the records system to see if anyone else from around then has a suspiciously empty file. i would start with public figures who have the initials ch or fn, as the single letters a, t, e and w don’t give us much to go on. of course, we do know a little more about w, so that might also be a good place to start. we know we are looking for an engineer with initial w, who knows something about codes and ciphers. whoever fn is, they are right that they should talk to w. using caesar and affine shift ciphers to encode their secret communications is poor, and i would have expected better from an organisation containing m. perhaps they will have taken the mysterious w’s advice and will have switched to something more secure in their future communications. that will make life a little more interesting for you and the team. good luck, harry my dearest m,
can it really be sixteen years since caroline first proposed this venture? i cannot believe it and wish with all my heart that she could have seen her vision taking shape.
last wednesday i took the opportunity you so kindly offered to see the progress with the foundation for myself. i was very encouraged by the industry on display, however i left with a concern that we may have miscalculated in our plans to hide the facility in the basement of the building. the ventilation there will, of necessity, be far more restricted than it would be on the upper floors, as i know from my own research. the evidence from your experiments suggests that our device will produce a very large amount of heat in operation. i cannot say for sure, but it seems likely that this will cause problems, both for the device itself and for its operators.
looking at the plans, i wondered briefly if we could hide it instead on an upper floor of the lighthouse, but you are likely to have many visitors who are inclined to curiosity, and i suspect the secret would not stay safe for long. we cannot take any risk that might expose us, and even if we keep it behind a locked door, the noise it will generate in operation will propagate more easily across the wharf, leading to questions. in the basement we can at least suppress the noise, reducing that risk, but that leaves the issue of managing the heat.
i am at a loss. any changes we want to make to the design of the laboratory and its facilities will need to be made very soon, as once the upper floors are built further heavy construction would attract unwanted attention. perhaps w will be able to suggest something; he is, after all, an engineer. in any case, i was planning to ask him to join us as head of security. i understand that he has some rather interesting ideas about codes and ciphers.
on a less pressing matter, our first experiments with the prototype are showing some success. if we had been able to run them earlier this year, we may even have been able to profit from the schleswig conflict, and it may not be too late to do so if we can mobilise our agents. there is much to play for here. others will be seeking to gain from the conflict, and i see no reason why we cannot do so too.
ever yours, fn